add: deploy smart contracts page (#10)
gear-tech/wiki: docs/get-started/smart-contracts/deploy.md

# Deploy Smart contracts

As noted earlier, creating a program is just one of the specific types of transactions that contain a WASM file as a payload.

Uploading a new program to the blockchain takes place by calling the custom extrinsic `gear.submitProgram(code, salt, initPayload, gasLimit, value)`. Where:

`code: Bytes` - binary WASM code

`salt: Bytes` - the random data that's added to the hashing process to force their uniqueness

> `initPayload: Bytes`- the initial payload of which will be processed by the init() function during contract initialization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`initPayload: Bytes`- the init message payload that will be processed by the init() function during contract initialization
```

> `gasLimit: u64` -  is the amount of gas that users are willing to spend to process upload a new program.

Reviewer: We should decide whether we use trailing dots or not.
```suggestion
`gasLimit: u64` -  is the amount of gas that users are willing to spend to process upload a new program. <--
```

`value: u128` - the value that will be transferred to the program address

## Program submit events

Program submit will trigger a series of events:

> Note: while extrinsics represent information from the outside world, events represent information from the chain. Extrinsics can trigger events.

They appear this way:

> 1. Gear network tries to post a message into the queue that aims to verify the source account has enough balance to cover sending of value and gas_limit and paying of small processing fee that linearly depends on payload size (this is the standard inclusion fee for Substrate framework, refer to Substrate Documentation for details).

Reviewer: The longest sentence I've read :laughing:

2. Block producer of Gear network posts the message into the block

> 3. Gear network reserve a maximum amount of gas specified by the user to be spent on program initialization.

Reviewer: Dot at the end of sentence vs. no dot.

4. Program creation and an init message enqueue:

```sh
MessageInfo example:

{
  messageId: 0x4b92a8589e06def4ce06257138ae6fd16c44d065abee9580b4b607fe3c85baa2
  programId: 0xf33843d1481416928d0a432cf357ee3e4dc562a2a963505a8efec75febb4f9de
  origin: 0xd43593c715fdd31c61141abd04a99fd6822c8558854ccde39a5684e7a56da27d
}
```
5. `gear.InitSuccess` or `gear.InitFailure` events. 

> > `programId` it's the unique address of the program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `programId` is the unique address of the program
```

## How to deploy

There are several ways to create a program:

### Via Gear GUI

> The easiest way to download the program is to use the official website [idea.gear-tech.io](https://idea.gear-tech.io)

Reviewer 2: You mean upload the program?

Reviewer 2: or even to submit?

### Via Polkadot.js.org

> Also to submit a program you can use the standard GUI for substrate-based projects. It's [polkadot{.js}](https://polkadot.js.org) app. Use `gear.submitProgram` extrinsic in Developer -> Extrinsic menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, you can use the standard GUI for substrate-based projects to submit a program. It's the [polkadot{.js}](https://polkadot.js.org) app. Use `gear.submitProgram` extrinsic in Developer -> Extrinsic menu.
```

2. Block producer of Gear network posts the message into the block

3. Program creation and an init message enqueue:

```sh
MessageInfo example:

{
  messageId: 0x4b92a8589e06def4ce06257138ae6fd16c44d065abee9580b4b607fe3c85baa2
  programId: 0xf33843d1481416928d0a432cf357ee3e4dc562a2a963505a8efec75febb4f9de
  origin: 0xd43593c715fdd31c61141abd04a99fd6822c8558854ccde39a5684e7a56da27d
}
```
4. `gear.InitSuccess` or `gear.InitFailure` events. 

> `programId` it's the unique address of the program

## How to deploy

There are several ways to create a program:

### Via Gear GUI

The easiest way to download the program is to use the official website https://idea.gear-tech.io

### Via Polkadot.js.org

Also to submit a program you can use the standard GUI for substrate-based projects. It's [polkadot{.js}](https://polkadot.js.org) app. Use `gear.submitProgram` extrinsic in Developer -> Extrinsic menu.

![img alt](./img/polkadot-gui.png)

### Via gear-js libery

Gear-js library that provides a simple and intuitive way to connect GEAR Component APIs, includes interaction with programs. More details [Gear API](https://wiki.gear-tech.io/api/connect)

> 

Author: Deleted
